[Music and chatter in background] [Sounds of a guitar riff]
Speaker 1: So, they may or may not be on their way, I don't know, basically. They're not even orientated now. We might have it cancel it.
Speaker 1: I don't even know if its Salar.
Speaker 1: When I talked to him I was like 'come on, we're getting on the bus, we're leaving'.
Speaker 4: And the bus already arrived you know
Speaker 1: I know
Speaker 1: Can you get them as close to the Soka cite as you can? Um, or if I guess. I guess.
Speaker 2: (translation from Spanish) They arrived, no? Eleven: twenty-three. If they run
Speaker 4: (man in background) (translation from Spanish) They have seven minutes.
Speaker 2: [translation from Spanish] they should leave them here.
Speaker 2: yes
Speaker 4: They are off the bus.
Speaker 4: (laughs) That's not good.
Speaker 2: No, they are here. Somewhere here, I guess.
Speaker 4: I was just telling the bus to get us here [[?]].
Speaker 1: They will be here in two minutes.
Speaker 2: Thank you. (faint clapping) Thank you (laughs).
(Chatter)
(Guitar playing)
Speaker 5: (translation from Spanish) One, two, three. (In English) One, two, three. (translation from Spanish) One, two, three.
Speaker 5: (translation from Spanish) Perhaps, this will be the telephone or microphone of Dan Sheehan
[SILENCE] to perform.
Speaker 6: (translation) Ah, its going to be him? Didn't you say it was going to be a girl?
Speaker 5: (translation from Spanish) No, he is with them.
Speaker 6: (expresses that she understands) Ah.
Speaker 3: (In the background) So, is he translating? Or is he just doing introductions?
Speaker 6: (translation from Spanish) Are you going to help me again?
Speaker 5: (translation from Spanish) One, two, three.
Speaker 6: Can you lower down the...?
Speaker 5: (translation from Spanish) And one, two, three.
(chatter and music)
Close, excitement builds.  (translation)In reality, it's less than what I thought  Looking for the mask,  Gosh that's!  (translation) Yes! And if not.. and no, because then maybe I present them and "where are they". (laughs)  How are you, Dan? (chatter)  I can try, I won't necessarily succeed but I.  (translation) That's what I was trying to ask Dan right now, when--  What's that? Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Were you there?  No, no I had other things to do. I had alot of other things going on...So.  We heard it first like the corporation[[?]]  Yes.
We are somewhere around.
It was alot of fun. Actually, you know I would like to get a glass of water.  Well, I think fifty-two.  I guess a cup. Or you know what? Here. Uh.  The next one starts at twelve-thirty. So, we could probably do--I mean you can do at fifty-two. You have enough time, it's going to be eleven-thirty when you start. And twelve-thirty for the next one.
Quiere que--She wants me to read this, do you want me to just do this right now? [[laughter]]  Hey, you want to read--why don't you?  I can read this right now. [[laughs]] Ok. And get this out of the way.  Then go ahead and start this here. They're coming.
Welcome to the 2016 Smithsonian Folklife Festival. This year we are proud to present two exciting programs: Sounds of California and basque innovation by culture. The Smithsonian Folklife Festival is produced by the Smithsonian Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage, and co-sponsored by the national park service. The sounds of California program is co-produced with the Alliance for California Traditional Arts, Radio Bilingue, the Smithsonian Asian/Pacific American Center, and the Smithsonian Latino Center. Presenting partners include the Aga Khan music initiative, Tumo Center for Creative Technologies, and My Armenia: a collaborative project between the people of Armenia, USAID, and the Smithsonian Institution. The program received Federal support from the Latino Initiatives Pool administrated by the Smithsonian Latino Center and the Asian/Pacific Initiative pool administered by the Smithsonian Asian/Pacific American Center. Other supporters include the Sacana Foundation and Smithsonian Grand Challenges consortia for the humanities.
Chelis Lopez: (Translation) Since the national trip from the city of Washington, Radio Bilingue presents a coverage of a special collection of sounds from the state of California. A special program that forms part of the festival of Folklore of the Smithsonian of this year. This production is a collaboration with the Alliance for California Traditional Arts and the "Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage" from the Smithsonian.
Chelis Lopez: I am Chelis Lopez, welcome.
Chelis Lopez: During the next hour, we will start with two impressive figures of Afghan music. Exile and destiny have brought them to find themselves in the United States; specifically in California. This year, 2016, the festival offers diverse cultures that were unified by immigration, by the movement, and the finding for belonging. Sounds of California and Basco is the two programs of this festival.
Chelis Lopez: I have the pleasure of having here on the table, two magnificent musicians of Afghanistan Salar Nader. Bien--Welcome!
Salar Nader: Good morning.
Chelis Lopez: Good morning. And Homayonn Sakhi.
Homayonn Sakhi: Good morning.
Chelis Lopez: Salar is a virtuous of a percussion instrumental called tabla and he is also composer. He was born in Germany and currently resides in San Fransico. Homayonn was born in Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan. And is a teacher of Rubab, the national instrument of Afghanistan. Both of them know not only their instruments, they know how to make them converse in unison.
Chelis Lopez: Successfully perfoming an amazing mix of the folkore of Afghanistan, with classical sounds of the North of India, and, as we heard at the concert yesterday, also the sounds of California and the United States are present.
Chelis Lopez: Homayonn immigrated to Pakistan and then arrived to Fremont, California, where - for sure - is the biggest Afghan population of all United States. It is, for me, a pleasure to interview them. Welcome!
Speaker 1: (English) So welcome to all of you to Radio Bilingue in Linea Abierta.
Chelis Lopez: (Translated from Spanish) I understand that both of you are exiles, fled due to the war, suffered the displacement. I'd like for you to talk a bit, to start, of that part of the story.
Speaker 1: So, we understand that you have arrived here in part as a result of the war in Afghanistan and the wars there. And the question that Chelis poses us: Can you, maybe, talk a little bit about that experience and that story that brought you to the United States?
Uh because was war regular war and that's why I went to, we went to [[?]].
"Speaker 1") [[?]]
And I was [[?]] til 2001. And we came. Yes, 2001.
(Speaker 1) A si que Homayonn Sakhi salio de Afganistan en ugh mil nuevecientos... ninety-one?
Ninety-two.
Mil nueve cientos noventa y dos. Y estuvo en Peshawar, en Pakistan hasta llegar a EEUU en el... would it be 2000?
(Sakhi) 2001.
Yeah. Yeah, 2001.
Muy bien. Ahora, los dos viven en California? Me gustaria saber como se conocieron, si se conocieron en California? Y como deciden-eh ser musicos? Hacer esta maravilla musical que escuchamos ayer.
And now you both live in California. Chelis is very interested in knowing how you both meet and how you came together to make this beautiful ugh marvelous music.
Easy answer. Is destiny.
(laughs) Su contestacion es destino.
Exactly (laughs).
Exactamente (laughs).
Actually when he moved to [[Freemon?]], he established a music school. School for [[?]].
(Speaker 1} El establecio un escuela de musica cuando llego a California.
Si. Bueno ya que mencionas, antes que hablemos aparte de la escuela musical. Yo se que vienes de una familia de musicos. Eh, esto influyo en ti para convertirte en el musico que eres hoy?
So, you come from a musical family, Homayonn, is that correct? And was that the ugh what the--
Exactly yes. My father is also[[?]]...my teacher.
Su papa tambien su maestro.
Speaker 1: So, uh before you got to California you heard the [?]
Speaker 1: Sorry you're right I do this all the time.
laughs
Speaker 1: Sorry
Speaker 1: When you got to California, sorry I'll get this right eventually, when you got to California was there Afghanistan music in California?
Speaker 2: Actually, yes.
Speaker 2: There's a lot of Afghani people from like and and I think 40,000 yea And, also my friends they were there. And that's why. And the weather. [spanish]. It was a it was a very nice climate, but I should add to that because there are many vocalists, composers, singers, songwriters who fled in the late seventies and ended up in Fremont, California or New York or Virginia. So it was kind of a reconnection of sorts with with different artists. And that's kinda how I grew up playing in in I grew up playing in house parties, Afghan house parities. Like I was 5, 6, 7 years old and that was my first experience with Afghan music because there was no like international festival presenting Afghan traditional music and that's where I got my feet wet initially. And that's actually how [[??]] and I first met you know the [[??]] style. [spanish]
Can you speak about the [[??]] a little bit. And she understands there might be two pieces to this [[??]] fill people in a bit. Sure. So the tabla is a principle accompanying instrument of Afghan music, Indian music, Pakistani music and the tabla has its own language so every syllable that's played, every stroke that's played on the tabla, has a corresponding note. So on my left hand, you have and on the right hand you have So together, combined. Then you have compositions like fixed compositions, compositions we practiced, compositions that my ustad my [[??]] gave to me. So the style of [[??]] I learned was from Panjab Panjab School of Tabla which is also prevalent in Afghanistan. Ustad Hashem and his whole family also follow Punjab style. So it's really interesting, this fusion of styles of tabla.
[Spanish]
One more thing I would like to add to that is that to play with [[??]] it's very special because you have to listen to a lot of [[??]] and [[??]] music is very very diverse; many styles, so many styles. And [[??]] plays all the styles. Like any province, he can just go all night for you. Like from one city to the next city to the next city, right? [laughter] [spanish]
Yea so can you tell us a little bit about the [[??]], which is known as the national instrument of Afghanistan. It is national instrument. [mumbling] Mhm yes, yes [[??]] yes, cierto. Can you tell us a little bit about the instrument, how it's played or how it's put together, what it looks like. So people on the radio might be able to imagine. Ok uh
unknown: [[Afghani]]  The rabab is made out of mulberry tree branch or root [[language?]] And it's 3 pieces of wood. So you have the body, the neck, and the chest. [spanish] It's like a fred board. [spanish] And also skin instrument, skin is the reason goat skin the goat skin. [spanish] And also have 3 main string and 2 [[??]], and 15 [[??]] strings. Tiene doce 2, 3, and 15. 3 main string? Si, [[??]]. 2 [[??]] we call [[??]] like king strings. [spanish] And 15 [[??]] strings. [spanish]  Ah la musica. The music from Afghanistan is specifically what you do two instruments together, or is this something you you have really elevated to your style.  Actually we a lot of different we have mahali, we call [[??]] and that's like 4 people that are playing together. Mahali is the name of the group. Mahali is the name of the style. So Mahal like for the people music for the people. And that's usually 4 piece ensemble. [Spanish] And also we have a different instrument like like tambor, [[??]], [[??]], [[??]], this is [[??]]. [Spanish] [[??]] which literally means underarm drum. [Spanish] [Spanish] This might be kind of a silly question, but do you have to play sitting down? So yea traditionally these instruments are played, most comfortable sitting down. Like [[??]] has made a robab that he can play standing up. But, thats [[??]]. That's [[??]]. [Laughter] [Spanish] [Laughter] Actually because because I start I was 10 years old, but that time people they said like you know what, this is like this is not for like young people this instrument. But this instrument is for like you know for older people. And that's why I said like you know what I have to play for young generation. [Spanish]
And OK and also, I have like I have like right now I have more than like 16 students. They are all young. They are just like 15, 14, 18, 16.
Speaker 1: 16  more than 16 years. More than 16, yea. [spanish] [spanish] Ok, in short, you mentioned how there is sometime perception of age difference. What were you doing, are you doing anything special to involve young people in this music? For example, do you ever put any English words or any any other musical influences into your music to attract young to appeal to young people? [Afghani] Actually
Some songs like like new songs I was playing that time. Eh that was like people they're saying like. this was not coming like this is people was not playing on their [[bob?]]. And that I was playing that songs for young people.
(Affirmation) Ah.
(Hamoyonn} And that's why like the young generation, they said, like, "you know what, we have to play it well."
(laughing)
Speaker 2: *speaking Spanish*
(speaker 1) Yeah, yes I was play like Gypsy king and I was like oh my god this is coming out of [[?]]
(speaker 2) *speaking Spanish*
(speaker 3) *women speaking Spanish*
(speaker 2) And that's what we heard last night in the concert [[??]]
(speaker 3) *women speaking Spanish* [00:25;06] (speaker 2) So uh we're in this program in the Folklight Festival this year; sounds of California and so the question the basic question is you've collaborated [[?]] quartet for example a very successful collaboration, and in the ambience of California, have you worked into; how have you embraced the sounds of California you hear around you in your music at all? Have you involved that in you music?
Speaker 1: *inaudible sounds*
Speaker 2: Ok alright i'm going to try to answer this; lots of pressure on me right now. [Both Laugh]
Speaker 1: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: so uh yes California has had an influence on our music, um we play a song called Hotel California.
Speaker 2: actually it sounds amazing on the [[?]] really
Speaker 1: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: *interrupts* but...
Speaker 2: I should say all jokes apart that what's really important although we're living in California and we're embracing and assimilating is we're hanging on to our roots, and our culture. California is gonna benefit from having [[Robov]] rather than the [[Robov]] player start playing all California tunes I think.
Speaker 1: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 1: so the future will have a..
Speaker 2: its a great time, great time to be in California you have a morning [[?]] there you know, its a all, there's thousands of guitar players, there should be more people taking after [[Robov]] I think.
Speaker 1: *speaking Spanish*
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: so in the context of California, are there any places you ended up playing that you never expected to play in your entire life?
[SILENCE]
Speaker 2: contexts, events, community settings, anything?
Speaker 1: (laughs) interesting actually for me everywhere is interesting [[?]] I'm playing like you know, because your playing like somewhere that is new you know its interesting
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: um but if the question is what's our most interesting night in California or interesting venue to play in California
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: yeah taking the Afghanistan music to some interesting setting
Speaker 3: well okay I'm just going to use yesterday as an example um, we have a brand new audience like [[?]] said they've never heard this music before, they've never seen the instruments before, or rarely. and we have to, we have 60 minutes, or 45 minutes or 25 minutes to engage the audience and hope that they walk away feeling better and more positive. And um the language that we speak might be completely foreign but the sounds, rhythms, melodies are universal and that's what we're basing everything off of, and um I think and I hope we've had pretty positive results.
Speaker 1: *speaking Spanish*
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: so now there on the radio [[??]] be playing excerpts from last nights concert; thats what we're doing right now.
[[LAUGHTER]]
Speaker 2: in this space
Speaker 1: I hope people be like it *speaks Spanish*
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: so yesterday was an interesting combination with a bass music, accordion with the tambourines and all that and she was fascinated, she know a lot of the people we're fascinated, but how did you feel about that? how? are there words that could describe what you felt in that experience?
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 4: when I play with any new artist or new collaboration the initial step we take is uh, a conversation, always positive, and um and we feel good about meeting each other and sharing a new dialogue.
Speaker 1: last night was without practice without anything, just came on stage that's it.
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish*
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: it sounds like you have rehearse all of your lives [[LAUGHTER]]
Speaker 2: and there was singing in the concert last night as well for example the mask singer, and do you have any idea what she was singing about?
Speaker 1: actually no, no [[LAUGHTER]]
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish* [[LAGHTER]]
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: [[LAUGHTER]] so she knows what the bass singer sang but she had no idea what you sang, that's a big secret [[LAUGHTER]]
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 4: if you tell us what she was saying we'll tell you what we we're saying [[LAUGHTER]]
*woman- I will [[LAUGHTER]]
Speaker 2: so she wants to know what was actually coming together there on stage
Speaker 1: oh uh the song was uh love song
*woman-love song*
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 1: it call lady lady john? *speaks Spanish*
Speaker 4: so ill take one line at a time so lady lady lady john [[???]] name of a woman and who ever composed it diffidently composed it for  [[??]]
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 4: and then uh that's the first line, the second line
Speaker 3: *speaks Spanish*
Speaker 4: you're killing me
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 4: killing me [[??]] is like your wedding for like, i hope to see you waiting, its longing and waiting for lady john.
Speaker 2: like sending her text messages and she's not responding [[LAUGHTER]]
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish*
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 1: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: so so the song, the bass song spoke about the parents sent their daughter to study to be a nun basically, a sister you know of the church and that she came back
Speaker 3: *speaking Spanish*
Speaker 4: and she came back and got married and had children the whole business
Speaker 1: that's awesome [[LAUGHTER]]
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: [[LAUGHTER]] but she did remember what she had sung
Speaker 2: the second song she couldn't remember what she sung because she was so nervous at the time, so that's all that's all.
*woman speaking Spanish*
Speaker 2: so if any body has a question for our invited artists here [[??]] now from California, uh Afghanistan background musicians both of them this is your chance to ask questions
Speaker 1: When you collaborated with the Kronos Quartet, did you introduce new instrumentation to their oeuvre? To their repertoire? Did you introduce, for instance, the Afghan instruments?
Homayoun Sakhi: Yes, actually Kronos Quartet actually David-he called me. He called me one day. He said like, "You're from Afghanistan, and you're playing the instrument Rubab." I said, like, "yes," and he said, like, "Can you compose for Kronos Quartet?" I said, like, "Of course. Why not?" And that time I was just -- this is like the sound in, you know, throughout [[Avajan??]]--
Speaker 3: Endorsed? Sponsored?
Homayoun Sakhi: Sponsored, but yeah, and after that I composed for Kronos Quartet.
Speaker 4: [Speaking Spanish] Entonces la pregunta era, si, en la colaboración con el cuarteto de cuerdas de Kronos, si habían introducido los instrumentos de Afghanistan et cetera, et cetera y dice Homayoun que (Then the question was, if in the collaboration with the Kronos string quartet, if they had introduced the instruments of Afghanistan et cetera, et cetera and Homayoun says that)
Speaker 4: [Speaking Spanish] Le llamó a David, que es uno de los principales del cuarteto Kronos, y pregunto si tocaba el Rubab. Decía que sí. (He called David, who is one of the leads of the Kronos quartet, and asked if he played the Rubab. He said yes.)
Speaker 4: [Speaking Spanish] Entonces resultó que compuso música para tocar ellos con el Kronos Cuartet. (Then it turned out that he composed music to play with the Kronos Quartet.)
Speaker 2: And also the name of the compose is Rangin Kaman, called Rainbow.
Speaker 2: And why I put the name Rainbow, because I choose from each religion in Afghanistan. Like the compose is new, but I choose from like North, South, from everywhere and I--together, yeah.
Speaker 4: [Speaking Spanish] Y le puso un nombre que se refiere a cierto lugar en Afganistán de todos los lugares con sus propias músicas. (And he gave it a name that refers to certain places in Afghanistan of all places with their own music.)
Speaker 4: [Speaking Spanish] Y por eso el nombre Rainbow. Se llama? (and that's why the name "Rainbow". Is the name?)
Homayoun Sakhi: Rainbow [[affirmative]]
Speaker 4: [Speaking Spanish] Rainbow como Arcoíris. (Rainbow as in Rainbow [Spanish word for rainbow]) Not Rambo.
[Laughter] No!
He did save Afghanistan in Rambo 3.
[Laughter] ¿Alguien mas tiene alguna pregunta? (Does anyone else have a question?)
Any other questions? Yes?
Um, can you talk about things you've seen you have in common with people in California? Maybe the Mexican influence there or the people from Mexico that you feel like the cultures have in common?
Si pueden hablar un poquito sobre las cosas que ustedes ven que tienen en común con las personas de Mexico y la cultura de ahí? (If you could speak a little about the things that you see that are similar to the people of Mexico and the culture from there)
Well, I mean we all have a common interest in good food.
[[Laughter]]
Todos tenemos el interés común en buena comida. (we all have the same interest in good food)
We get really good avocados in California--
Si hay aguacates excelentes en California. (yes, there are excellent avocados in California)
Homayoun and I love it,
Homayoun Sakhi: and also the music, the music is very close. I mean Afghani music, because I- some melodies is very like close to.
[[Spanish]] Y ademas a veces la música la melodías en particular a veces se parecen bastante(And also sometimes the music, the melodies in particular, sometimes seem quite similar.)
Homayoun Sakhi: The scale they are, you are using that scale, you know, also in Afghanistan, like we are using that scale.
y la misma escala también que se usa también en Afganistán se usa. (and the same scale that is used, in Afghanistan is used as well.
Santana besame mucho
[[laughter]]
Another common interest we have outside of the music is that we all love football, soccer.
So there is a massive--
[[laughter]]
There is a massive soccer tournament, Afghan soccer tournament that happens every year,
and then it's mixed. We also have visiting players from Mexico,
who we actually, actually pay to play on the teams.
Its kind of like, yeah, [[laughter]] cause we need like some football stars
and Homayoun and I, we always go and attend
so you will find us in audience and we just love it.
perdon- Otra cosa en común es el futbol internacional, que se se juega mucho en California, y ellos tienen sus-- su tornamento todos los años osea su competición y llegan y ellos asisten a los juegos así que se van a los juegos ahí los van a ver ahí.(sorry- Another thing in common is international soccer, which is played a lot in California, and they have their-- their tournament every year, I mean their competition and they come And they attend the games so if you go to the games there you will see them there.)
Homayoun Sakhi: And also I love ceviche.
[[laughter]]
ceviche, ceviche, ceviche
Y a Homayoun le encanta el ceviche. (Homayoun loves ceviche)
Ceviche peruano o ceviche mexicano o--? (Peruvian ceviche, or Mexican ceviche, or--)
Homayoun Sakhi: Mexican, yeah.
Ah, ok, mexicano.
Yeah, Mexicano, ceviche mexicano. (Yeah, Mexican, Mexican ceviche)
[[Spanish]] Bueno vamos a seguir por supuesto abriendo el micrófono para que hagan sus preguntas, pero yo quisiera saber, ¿cual es el lo que ustedes perciben de las nuevas generaciones de la comunidad de Afganistán en California, sobre todo Freemont dijimos que es -- donde hay mas población, pero están los jóvenes conectados con la música con la tradicional de Afganistán?(Well, of course we will continue to open the microphone so that you can ask your questions, but I would like to know, what do you perceive of the new generations of the Afghan community in California, especially Freemont. We said that where there is more population, but are young people connected with the music with the traditional Afghanistan?)
What is your impression of young people
of Afghanistanic descent in California,
like in Freemont, for example, where you
you lived for a while anyway,
What's, what's their--
how do they see their music?
Are they coming to music?
Are they becoming part of the music-making and appreciation?
Homayoun Sakhi: Actually yes, you know,
si
yeah a lot now they are like trying-- they are playing tabla, rubab, and they are singing they, they are really interested.
si hay jóvenes tocando tabla y rubab y hay interés hay interés (yes, there are young people playing table and rubab, there is interest, there is interest)
That's why I have a school in there.
Y por eso tiene su escuela. (and that's why he has his school)
[[laughter]]
I'm teaching and people they are coming, the kids
enseñando a jóvenes, a niños que vienen al escuela (teaching young people, kids that come to the school)
See, it's--it's
it's a really important time that we
are living in right now
as Afghan-Americans being in California.
and what Homayoun is doing,
cause he's in the north, I'm in the south,
and we have completely committed ourselves 150% to keep
the music original, authentic,
so that the next Afghan generation that is born
here in the States has some type of
connection to their roots, because we cannot lose that.
That's the last thing we have
and it's very, very important,
so, if you are listening to this radio interview
and you happen to be Afghan American or not Afghan
and you are interested in Afghan culture,
look up Homayoun up north.
You can take vocal classes with him, you can play rubab,
and he is doing a massive service to the community,
and for the next generations
you know 30, 40, 50, years from now
we are not going to be here and we have to leave something behind.
Entonces una epoca muy, muy importante en la historia para la gente de origen Afghanistani en California, porque ahora ellos-- lo que estan haciendo ellos es tratar de dejar la rais, viva de la musica de la cultura de Afghanistan en Estados Unidos. (So it is an epoch, very important in the history of the people of Afghani origin in California, because now they, what they are doing, is trying to leave the root, alive of the music, of the culture of Afghanistan, in the United States)
Y en cuarenta y cincuenta años dice que quiza ellos no van estar aqui, pero quieren dejar su legado para que la gente nueva, sea Afghanistani o no afghanistani, se pueda, este, llegar a la musica para aprender la tradicion. (And in 40, or 50 years, they say that perhaps they will not be here, but they want to leave a legacy, so that the new people, be them Afghani or not Afghani, can come to the music to learn the tradition.)
Bueno, es importante yo agradezco que ustedes siendo jovenes estan haciendo este trabajo para que las otras generaciones mas jovenes continúen con la tradicion y la querensa por la musica de Afghanistan pero que hay de quienes ustedes aprendieron de -- aparte de tú familia--  (Good, it is important and I am grateful that you, being young, are doing this work so that other generations, younger, can continue the tradition and the want for the music from Afhanistan, but what is there of the people you learned from, aside from your family)
Por su puesto, los abuelos o las abuelas, la gente mayor de Afghanistan que vive quizas en Freemont o en todo California y que son musicos? (of course, the grandpas, the grandmas, the older people of Afghanistan that live prehaps in Freemon or in all of California and are musicians?" [00:45:2 She says she appreciates that young people like you are carrying on this tradition. What have you learned yourself from other Afghani people living in California -- older people. Are there other things you've learned from older people of Afghanistani descent in California?
[Speaking Spanish] O quizas si an tocado con ellos a lo mejor con musicos viejos? (Or perhaps you have played with them, perhaps with old musicians?)
Have you played with older musicians, for example in California?
[Speaking Spanish} En California?
In California [affirmative], yes.
Homayoun Sakhi: I don't know. [[laughter]]
Speaker 1: (laughs)Que no sabe! Lo tiene que pensar.
Homayoun Sakhi: Like, like, like You're saying like, afghan?
Chelis: Si. Si. Si
Salar Nader: Uhhh, Sunday. I yeah I would play with uh... his name is uh Aziz Erabi
Speaker 1: Oh! Aziz Erabi
Speaker 1: Si Si. Ha tocado con Aziz Erabi. Era bien. si, si y que tiene su disco en la ruli me acuerdo ese disco. [[laughter]]
Speaker 3: Bien, que hacen además ustedes para hacer el lo que Salar mencionaba hace un momento.
Speaker 3: Estar en este tiempo moderno digamos, en este 2016 pero no desconectarse del pasado.
Speaker 1: So what do you need to do to live in these modern times, 2016, and not disconnect from the past?
Speaker 1: Which is a little bit like what you were describing.
Salar Nader: Eat a lot of ceviche [[laughter]]
Speaker 1: Comer mucho ceviche. [[laughter]]
Chelis: Bien Afghanistan. [[laughter]]
Salar Nader: What do we need to do to maintain
Speaker 1: Como para sostener, o sea, mantener la tradición.
Chelis: Si, si
Salar Nader: Well, we wake up and you can never kick the Afghan out of the Afghan. No matter what you do, you know, we're we're we're--
Salar Nader: We maintain our language, we speak Farsi-- Humayoun speaks Farsi and Pashto. We cook our traditional foods, we, we pray, we, we maintain our spirituality, and, and we have our families.
Salar Nader: You know, thank God, the blessings uh we've been very lucky and fortunate to have a second home outside of Afghanistan and California.
Salar Nader: Where you know we have our communities and we are maintaining, like I said again, maintaining our roots.
Salar Nader: Evolving with the times but still maintaining our roots and open to collaborating all of it. But at the same time just reminding ourselves where we came from.
Salar Nader: How hard our ancestors worked to give us the knowledge, his father, his grand guru [?] who also came to the States in 1974.
Salar Nader: And and-- you know these are quick times. Social media-- viral videos and uh you can really lose yourself in this.
Speaker 1: Cuando amanecen, o sea cuando despiertan cada día, ellos viven su vida de Afghanistanes. Porque de la gente de Afghanistan no se puede quitar lo Afghanistan. No cierto?
Speaker 1: Y ademas, vivimos-- en una situación aquí en California. Por ejemplo, que aprendió de su abuelo Homayoun.
Speaker 1: Y estamos con esta época de medios sociales, verdad? Que se puede perder en los medios sociales.
Speaker 1: Pero ellos practican su espiritualidad, su comida, su su su vida familiar, y todas las tradiciones. O sea viven la vida de ser Afghanistani en California.
Speaker 1: Y eso es lo que están haciendo como para promover-- la-- la-- la continuidad de su cultura en California.
Salar Nader: And I just want to add one more thing. Is that Homayoun, you go back to Afghanistan right? Like 2, 3 times a year?
Homayoun Sakhi: Yes, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Y Homayoun regresa a Afghanistan periódicamente tambien.
Salar Nader: Yeah. So no matter what's happening or what you see in the media that's happening in Afghanistan on a daily basis.
Salar Nader: We actually still go back. We go back together. We're actually planning on going back in October and we teach music there.
Salar Nader: Homayoun's 60 students that he's mentioning, I just wanna kind of add this, those are 60 professional recording concert-playing musicians.
Salar Nader: That's not to mention the hundreds of others that are just studying. Right?
Homayoun Sakhi: [[incohenerent]]
Speaker 1: Y ellos-- este-- estaban diciendo que primeramente los estudiantes, los 60 estudiantes, que menciono Homayoun.
Speaker 1: Son al nivel profesional y ademas hay como centenares de otros estudiantes.
Speaker 1: Y a pesar de lo que se-- se da cuentos, se oyen en los medios, en la television, en lo que sea
Speaker 1: Ellos si regresan a su-- a Afghanistan para enseñar, para dar classes y para tocar.
Speaker 1: Para mantener contacto con su cultura
Crowd: [[cross talk]]
Speaker 5: Do you like track and field?
Salar Nader: I love track and field.
Speaker 5: Yeah, uh-- I was wondering if in Afghanistan is there track and field?
Salar Nader: The Afghanistan track and field-- track and field by itself-- olympics was [[support to our wish?]]. They love it.
Speaker 1: La pregunta es, si en Afghanistan les gusta track and field, o sea el deporte olímpico. Y dice que les encanta. Y sí, se pratica
Salar Nader: You know, I should also mention that Homayoun, growing up in his teenage years-- He's told me while we're on tour or traveling, you know, you're on the road with each other for a month in each other's face everyday on stage.
Salar Nader: So it's like new stories, what are we gonna talk about. And at one time Homayoun liked Martial Arts.
Salar Nader: Like uh-- Bruce Lee. Taekwondo... [Laughter] I mean, no, really. Seriously. So watch out, don't [laughter]... Be careful!
Chelis Lopez: Tenemos tiempo para una pregunta más aqui, por favor.
Speaker 6: How do you promote Afghan music in America? How do you keep it alive? I heard you talking about growing up with house parties.
Salar Nader: Right.
Speaker 6: And I suspect there's some attraction in festivals.
Speaker 6: But does it play well in clubs? In American club style settings? How do you promote it?
Salar Nader: Yeah, it's really tough. It's really really tough and we, this is something we deal with on a daily basis. We're living in the time of Justin Bieber and like boy bands and that's never gonna go away.
Salar Nader: So we're in this tiny little slither of world music and we're like a sub genre of a sub genre of a sub genre of world music.
Salar Nader: Afghan music? Like, a lot of people don't even know that we exist actually. Uh, you know, post 9/11 people thought Afghan music - since it was banned - had no idea that there was actually a history of Afghan music.
Salar Nader: And that goes back a couple of thousand years. To Sufi chanting, Qawwali Farsi music for [?] spiritual. That's what it was.
Salar Nader: So, night clubs. We don't -- We never say no because the integrity of the instrument is such a pure and spiritual instrument that -- you know, if you have kind of like--
Salar Nader: People taking shots of tequila and having beer while they're performing it's just not a great feeling because the instruments are supposed to make you feel intoxicated.
Salar Nader: Are supposed to heal you and-- and have those medicinal qualities in the instrument
Salar Nader: I mean you just listen to the rubab in the morning, you just listen to it, it will really make your day.
Salar Nader: I promise you, you listen to 15, 20 minutes of rubab you will be healed.
Homayoun Sakhi: And also I want to tell you, uh like sometime you know, I was feeling sick and I we nt on stage. Like I'm not feeling anything, just like I'm playing that certain -- At that time it's just I wanna play and I want to feel my music. And that's it.
Salar Nader: Right.
Speaker 1: La pregunta era
Salar Nader: But to maintain for support and whatnot, I mean we're open to playing outdoor, indoor, you name it. But we need the help of all the, any presenter, any label that's out there that's listening to this, I mean we're more than willing to get this music out there, we have to. We have to. So we need the help and support
Salar Nader: La pregunta era como se promeve a parte de las festivales y los clubes, como promeve la musica de Afghanistan, la musica de ellos aqui en la sociedad y en breve, dice que si estan abiertos tocar en clubes, que dice Homayoun que lo que importa es llegar, sentir su musica, y tocar. La situacion, que sea. Dice Salar que este, ellos estan abiertos tocar pero a veces si la gente esta bebiendo por ejemplo, cerveza, le da un poco de pena porque la musica es lo que, es lo que emborracha la gente digamos, en la tradicion de ellos y no se necesita cerveza y nada como emborracharse. Pero estan abiertos tocar en cualquier situacion. Estan abiertos a grabar con cualquier sello de discos. Estan abiertos a cualquier posibilidad.
Chelis: Pues, muchas gracias a los dos Salar y Humayoun por estar con nosotros en esta edicion especial de RadioBilingue. Gracias.
[Salar Nader]: Gracias Radio Bilingue [laughter] Muchos gracias. Thank you.
Chelis: Gracias a ustedes tambien por estar aqui, la audiencia. Esta ha sido una cubertura especial de Radio Bilingue . Desde el festival de Folklore de la Smithsonian. En el paseo nacional en la ciudad de Washington. El festival celebra en esta decision a dos comunidades "los vascos inovacion mediante la cultura" y "sonidos de California". Esta es una produccion de Radio Bilingue realizada en colaboracion con la Alianza para las artes tradicionales de California y el centro para el Folklore y la Herencia Cultural de la Smithsonian. Agradecemos la colaboracion especial de Steve Fisher director technico Sun Jim Kim, coordernadora del program dentro del festival del Folklore de Smithsonian. Los fondos proceden en parte del consejo de las Artes de California y el fondo Nacional para las artes el equipo de campo incluye el ingeniero Michael Yoshida el productor executivo es Samuel Orozco, el productor general Hugo Moralez. Yo soy Chelis Lopez, gracias!
Chelis: Thank You so much, Thank you!